Add required fields proposal (#1)
cue-lang/proposal: designs/1951-required-fields-v2.md

This proposal replaces https://github.com/cue-lang/cue/issues/822.
Thanks to all of the comments and suggestions contributed there.
The proposal presented here is considerably simpler and changes less
about the current semantics.

# Objective

> We introduce a new field type: required fields, with the aim to address

Reviewer: Singular and plural don't work well together here.
```suggestion
We introduce a new field type, a _required_ field, with the aim to address
```

various shortcomings of CUE while at the same time allowing for simpler semantics for other features we wish to introduce in CUE.

# Background
One of CUE’s strengths is that it allows specifying types, constraints,
and values within a unified framework. This means that fields in CUE have many different roles.
For example, they can define simple JSON-like data, “templatize” or add derived fields that

> compute fields from these data fields, add constraints to data, or define top-level schema types (also constraints).

Reviewer: Given that "templatize" isn't a conventional word, how about making it subordinate to the more English explanation?

```suggestion
For example, they can define simple JSON-like data, add derived fields that
compute fields from these data fields (“templatize”), add constraints to data, or define top-level schema types (also constraints).
```

## Output and interpretation modes
There are two major modes for outputting and interpreting CUE: 
schema: output a schema with all constraints intact

> data: outputs only concrete data after validating all constraints

Reviewer: This doesn't read well in markdown (I think it wants to be a bulleted list). "output" feels a bit awkward as an active verb. Maybe "produce" or "generate" might read better?

```suggestion
There are two major modes for outputting and interpreting CUE: 
- schema: produce a schema with all constraints intact
- data: produce only concrete data after validating all constraints
```

The schema mode corresponds to the `cue def` command.

> The data mode corresponds to `cue export`. `cue eval` lives in a limbo land in between the two

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data mode corresponds to `cue export`. `cue eval` lives at a poorly specified point in between the two
```
?

and should probably be deprecated or could at least benefit from some clarifications.
This is covered in https://github.com/cue-lang/cue/issues/337.

### Schema mode

> The main goal of evaluating in schema mode are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main goals of schema-mode evaluation are:
```
?

1. Simplification of schema, for instance after unifying two schemas.
1. Validate that a schema, or the unification of two schemas,

> 2. is internally consistent, that is, has no errors.

Reviewer: You don't want three items here.

```suggestion
1. Simplification of schema (after unifying two schemas, for instance)
1. Validate that a schema, or the unification of two schemas, is internally consistent; that is, there are no errors.
```

Schema mode preserves all constraints: outputting CUE in schema mode requires all fields,

> including optional ones, to be output. 

Reviewer: Again, "output" seems clunky here.

```suggestion
Schema mode preserves all constraints: generating CUE in schema mode requires all fields,
including optional ones, to be produced. 
```

### Data mode
In data mode, all [regular fields](https://cuelang.org/docs/references/spec/#definitions-and-hidden-fields)
must be concrete, recursively, and are output.
It is an error for values to be non-concrete, like `a: string`,
or yield an incomplete error, like `a: b + c`, where `b` or `c` are not concrete.

### Validation
Validation can occur in either mode.

> `cue vet` is essentially used in both modes of interpretation.

Reviewer: "essentially" is redundant here.

```suggestion
`cue vet` is used for both modes of interpretation.
```

By default it uses schema mode, but it can be explicitly set to a data mode by using the `-c` flag.

## Field Semantics
We identified the following list of common interpretation or use cases for field semantics:

1. A field is defined with the given value, which must evaluate without error (regular field)

> 1. A field _may_ be defined, in which case given constraints apply (optional field).

Reviewer: "given" reads awkwardly here IMHO, and we could probably make "constraints" singular, given that we can always consider it as a single constraint.

```suggestion
1. A field _may_ be defined, in which case the associated constraint applies (optional field).
```
?

> 1. A field _must_ be defined elsewhere (required field).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. A field _must_ be defined elsewhere and satisfy an associated constraint (required field).
```

1. A field must not exist (optional field constraint where the constraint is an error value).
1. A field is only defined if some condition is met (conditional field).

> In effect there are two types of fields: those that provide constraints and those that populate values. Below we discuss these use cases within particular usage contexts.

Reviewer: It would be good to briefly say which of the above items fall into which categories (maybe in parentheses after "those that provide constraints" and "those that populate values").

I'm not sure myself which category the latter item falls into.

### Data and export
In CUE, we classify data as [regular fields](https://cuelang.org/docs/references/spec/#definitions-and-hidden-fields)
(so no definitions or hidden fields), with only concrete values.

> In a nutshell, any JSON value is data in CUE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any JSON value is data in CUE.
```

> In contrast to JSON, but like YAML, CUE permits fields with top-level references to other data fields

Reviewer: What does "top-level" mean here?

Author: Good point. Don't quite remember. I think it can be dropped.

to be classified as data.

### Schema and constraints
There are two common cases for defining fields in schema:

1. If the user specifies a field `x`, apply constraint `c`.
1. The user _must_ specify a field `x` with constraint `c`.

Orthogonally to this, the user may wish to specify that `c` must be concrete.
This is not done explicitly, but rather is enforced implicitly in data mode
by requiring that any regular field (so not a constraint `a?: x`) must be concrete.

Case 1 can be expressed as:
```

> x? : c

Reviewer: Personally, I prefer the colon to nestle up to the LHS (`cue fmt` and convention JSON formatting concurs)

```suggestion
x?: c
```

```
Case 2 is currently expressed as:
```

> x : c

Reviewer: ```suggestion
x: c
```

```

> The requirement that the user must specify a field is only implicit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The requirement that the user must specify a field is implicit.
```

This works as desired when `c` is not concrete: because “non-optional” fields are required to be concrete,

> it will force the user to specify the field with the concrete value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This works as desired when `c` is not concrete: because “non-optional” fields are required to be concrete.
It will force the user to specify the field with the concrete value.
```

Also, do we actually need the scare quotes around "non-optional" ?

It is not possible, however, to force a user to specify a field with a specific concrete value.

> This includes any list or struct.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is not possible, however, to force a user to specify a field with a specific concrete value,
which includes any list or struct.
```

This is because there is no syntactic distinction between a field that is a constraint,
but required, and a regular field: the required property is implied by the fact that regular
fields must be concrete upon output.
That is, a regular field containing a concrete value that must be specified is
indistinguishable from a regular field with a concrete value specified by the user.

See, for instance, https://github.com/cue-lang/cue/issues/740 where this is problematic.

### Derived fields and templating

> The purpose of derived fields and templating is to automatically populate fields for a user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The purpose of templating, including deriving fields, is to automatically populate fields for a user.
```
But this is a very didactic (and potentially controversial statement), because someone else might consider that deriving a field to be schema-like in some cases.

How about saying something like "We consider that the purpose of templating..." or similar to make it a bit softer?

Possible use cases are:

* providing a set of defaults, 

> * defining a higher level of abstraction that is mapped to some more concrete representation, or 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* defining a higher level of abstraction that is mapped to some more concrete representation
```

* converting between two versions of an API.

Examples of such fields are:

1. Defaults: `a: *1 | int`

> 1. Derived values: `a: b + c`

Reviewer: We've called this "derived fields" before, so maybe keep to that terminology?
```suggestion
1. Derived fields: `a: b + c`
```

1. Derived constraints: `a: b + c`, but only if `b + c` is defined.

> All derived fields use regular, non-optional, fields.

Reviewer: This is an assertion that's not necessarily true (it's perfectly feasible to define a required or optional field as a derived field AFAICS). Maybe "should use" ? I'm not even sure that that's true tbh.

Author: Good point. That is absolutely true.

I'll removed that sentence.

If a field should only be added conditionally, one currently has to revert to rather verbose methods, such as
```
a?: int
b?: int
if a != _|_ && b != _|_ {
  c: a + b
}
```
Case 3 is common (see https://github.com/cue-lang/cue/issues/1232).

> Having something much more compact would be nice and some thoughts for a proposal for that are in progress.

Reviewer: I found this hard to parse.
```suggestion
Having something much more compact would be nice: we have some thoughts for a possible proposal to address this.
```
?

### Policy
Policy is like schema but tends to have more derived constraints.
A key difference with schema is that policy is often not defined by the team or organization
that defined the original schema.
A policy typically just adds constraints to an existing schema.
An example use case typical to policy is making a field required that was previously not required.
Another is making constraints more specific, without making them concrete or implicitly defined.

```
#Def: {
    name?: string
    speed?: number
}
#DefPolicy: #Def & {
    name?:  strings.MinRunes(1)
    speed?: >100
}
```
# Proposal
CUE currently has the “optional field constraint”, denoted `foo?: value`.

We propose adding a “required field constraint”, denoted `foo!: value`, which is like `foo?: value`,

> but requires a regular value be provided for `foo` (a field `foo:` without  `!:` or ?:`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but requires a regular value be provided for `foo` (a field `foo:` without  `!:` or `?:`).
```

We refer to optional field constraints and required field constraints collectively as “field constraints”.

> As a general rule, all data and data templating would be defined with regular fields,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a general rule, we consider that all data and data templating should be defined with regular fields,
```

whereas schemas would be defined in terms of field constraints.
Of course, CUE being CUE, mixing these two fields is allowed:
this rule is not a restriction but suggested as a matter of style and proper usage.

## Semantics

> Informally, requiredness `!` is a property of a field that is unified independently of a field value.

Reviewer: I don't think the `!` helps much here.
```suggestion
Informally, requiredness is a property of a field that is unified independently of a field value.
```

The following holds:
```
{a?: x} > {a!: x} > {a: x}
```
for any `x`, such as `int` or `1`.

For instance:
```
{foo!: 3} & {foo: 3}  	→  {foo: 3}
{foo!: 3} & {foo: int}   	→  {foo: 3} // X
{foo!: 3} & {foo: <=4}	   	→  {foo: 3}  // X

{foo!: int} & {foo: int} 	  	→  {foo: int}
{foo!: int} & {foo?: <1}   	→  {foo!: <1}
{foo!: int} & {foo: <=3}   	→  {foo: <=3}
{foo!: int} & {foo: 3}  		→  {foo: 3}
```
Note the subtle, but important difference between this proposal and #822: `foo!: value`
only requires that a field be specified; it does not require it to be concrete.

> As we are no longer proposing a change to the semantics of `x: string`, though, the net effect is roughly the same.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However as we are no longer proposing a change to the semantics of `x: string`, the net effect is roughly the same.
```

As a consequence, though, it is now possible to create a concrete value without
having the user actually provide it (see the line marked `X` in the above example).
So this loses the strictness of the original proposal.
In practice, this likely is not much of an impediment: JSON and YAML cannot specify such fields,
and thus this would not limit the ability to validate such files: they still need to specify

> the actual concrete value to pass.

Reviewer: It might be good to say that the proposal is technically complete at this point?

```suggestion
the actual concrete value to pass.

That completes the proposal.
```
